#summary Install howto for fw-template-erlang

= Introduction =

This page will assist you in installing fw-template-erlang.

= The Easy Way =

If you are running a debian package based system (Debian, Ubuntu, [http://www.finkproject.org/ Mac OS/X with fink], etc.), just go to the 
[http://code.google.com/p/fwtemplates/downloads/list downloads section] and grab the latest {{{.deb}}} files.

= The Less Easy Way =

Prerequisites:
  1. [FramewerkInstall framewerk]
  1. working erlang installation.
     * debian: aptitude install erlang-dev
     * os/x: apt-get install erlang-otp
     * freebsd: pkg_add -r erlang
     * others: ???

Unpack the tarball, then run configure and make check.
{{{
# tar -zxf fw-template-erlang-0.1.21.tar.gz 
# cd fw-template-erlang-0.1.21
# ./configure --prefix=/usr/local && make -s check
}}}
The default prefix is {{{/usr}}} so if you are ok with that then you can omit the prefix argument.  Hopefully you will see something like
{{{
...
PASS: test-template
==================
All 1 tests passed
==================
}}}
If not, the test output is in {{{tests/test-template.out}}}; perhaps it is informative.

Now you can either {{{make install}}} to just stick stuff on your system, or you can build your own debian package if you are on a debian based system. To do the latter type
{{{
# env FW_DUPLOAD_ARGS="-no" make release
...
}}}
which should run the tests again and ultimately produce a {{{.deb}}} in {{{fw-pkgout/}}} in the root directory of the project which you can install.[[#1 1]]
{{{
# ls fw-pkgout/
fw-template-erlang-build_0.1.21_i386.deb  fw-template-erlang_0.1.21_all.deb
# sudo dpkg -i fw-pkgout/fw-template-erlang_0.1.21_all.deb 
Selecting previously deselected package fw-template-erlang.
(Reading database ... 19755 files and directories currently installed.)
Unpacking fw-template-erlang (from .../fw-template-erlang_0.1.21_all.deb) ...
Setting up fw-template-erlang (0.1.21) ...
}}}

That's it.

= Footnotes =

== 1 ==
You might see some errors here if dupload is not installed.  Framewerk wants to upload the package it makes to a repository and I'm assuming you don't have one, hence the FW_DUPLOAD_ARGS="-no" (in case you do have dupload installed, this causes it to do a dry run).

If you have dupload installed and your own repository than you can set FW_DUPLOAD_ARGS to "do the right thing".  For your own projects you can even hard code this in.  Check out {{{fw-pkgin/config}}} if you are interested.