#summary Install howto for fw-template-javascript

= Introduction =

This page will assist you in installing fw-template-javascript.

If you've already installed fw-template-javascript and want to know how to use it, 
check out the [FwTemplateJavascriptWalkthrough walkthrough].

= The Easy Way =

If you are running a debian package based system (Debian, Ubuntu, [http://www.finkproject.org/ Mac OS/X with fink], etc.), just go to the 
[http://code.google.com/p/fwtemplates/downloads/list?can=2&q=*.deb&colspec=Filename+Summary+Uploaded+Size+DownloadCount downloads section] and grab the latest {{{.deb}}} files.

= The Less Easy Way =

Prerequisites:
  1. [FramewerkInstall framewerk]
  1. working [http://www.mozilla.org/rhino/ rhino] installation.
     * debian: aptitude install rhino
     * os/x (with [http://www.finkproject.org/ fink]): fink install rhino
     * others: ???
  1. [http://www.jslint.com/lint.html jslint] installed (optional but useful)
     * the template expects an executable named {{{jslint}}} to be in the path and do the right thing.  the walkthrough has [http://code.google.com/p/fwtemplates/wiki/FwTemplateJavascriptWalkthrough#jslint_integration more detail].
  1. [http://developer.yahoo.com/yui/compressor/ yuicompressor] installed (optional but useful)
     * the template expects an executable named {{{yuicompressor}}} to be in the path and do the right thing.  the walkthrough has [http://code.google.com/p/fwtemplates/wiki/FwTemplateJavascriptWalkthrough#yuicompressor_integration more detail].
  1. [http://code.google.com/p/js-test-driver/ jstestdriver] installed (optional but useful)
     * the template expects an executable named {{{jstestdriver}}} to be in the path and do the right thing.  the walkthrough has [http://code.google.com/p/fwtemplates/wiki/FwTemplateJavascriptWalkthrough#jstestdriver_integration more detail].

If you are not running a debian based system, or you just like to kick the tires, 
go to the [http://code.google.com/p/fwtemplates/downloads/list?can=2&q=*.tar.gz&colspec=Filename+Summary+Uploaded+Size+DownloadCount downloads section] and grab the latest {{{.tar.gz}}} file.

Unpack the tarball, then run configure and make check.
{{{
# tar -zxf fw-template-javascript-0.0.1.tar.gz 
# cd fw-template-javascript-0.0.1
# ./configure --prefix=/usr/local && make -s check
}}}
The default prefix is {{{/usr}}} so if you are ok with that then you can omit the prefix argument.  Hopefully you will see something like[[#2 2]]
{{{
...
PASS: test-template
==================
All 1 tests passed
==================
}}}
If not, the test output is in {{{tests/test-template.out}}}; perhaps it is informative.

Now you can either {{{make install}}} to just stick stuff on your system, or you can build your own debian package if you are on a debian based system. To do the latter type
{{{
# env FW_DUPLOAD_ARGS="-no" make release
...
}}}
which should run the tests again and ultimately produce a {{{.deb}}} in {{{fw-pkgout/}}} in the root directory of the project which you can install.[[#1 1]]
{{{
# ls fw-pkgout/
fw-template-javascript-build_0.0.1_i386.deb fw-template-javascript_0.0.1_all.deb
# sudo dpkg -i fw-pkgout/fw-template-javascript_0.0.1_all.deb 
Selecting previously deselected package fw-template-javascript.
(Reading database ... 49610 files and directories currently installed.)
Unpacking fw-template-javascript (from .../fw-template-javascript_0.0.1_all.deb) ...
Setting up fw-template-javascript (0.0.1) ...
}}}

That's it.

= Next steps =

Check out the [FwTemplateJavascriptWalkthrough fw-template-javascript walkthrough].

= Footnotes =

== 1 ==
You might see some errors here if dupload is not installed.  Framewerk wants to upload the package it makes to a repository and I'm assuming you don't have one, hence the FW_DUPLOAD_ARGS="-no" (in case you do have dupload installed, this causes it to do a dry run).

If you have dupload installed and your own repository than you can set FW_DUPLOAD_ARGS as desired.  For your own projects you can even hard code this in.  Check out {{{fw-pkgin/config}}} if you are interested.

== 2 ==
If you see something like:
{{{
fw requires GNU make to build, you are using bsd make
*** Error code 1

Stop.
}}}
Then you are using bsd make which will not work.  Try again with gnu make, e.g.,
{{{
# ./configure --prefix=/usr/local && gmake -s check
}}}