#summary Basic introduction to fw-template-cxx.

= Introduction =

fw-template-Cxx is a C development template for framewerk.  It is very
similar to [FwTemplateCWalkthrough fw-template-C] and like it features:
    * automake setup: libtool and compiler setup done for you.
    * pkg-config integration: pkg-config files for your project are made for    you.  In addition, if any dependencies provide pkg-config files they are used, generally eliminating the need for AC_CHECK_LIBS and AC_CHECK_HEADERS.[[#1 1]]
    * valgrind integration: standard targets for running make check with valgrind.
    * coverage integration: standard configure and make check support for enabling coverage analysis.  guards against releasing packages with coverage enabled.

This walkthrough demonstrates fw-template-cxx.

= Prerequisites =

[FwTemplateCPPInstall fw-template-cxx installed]

It's very helpful to have done the [FramewerkWalkthrough framewerk walkthrough]
and the [FwTemplateCWalkthrough fw-template-c walkthrough].

= Details =

== Initialize the project ==

First, set up the project with fw-init [FramewerkWalkthrough#Initialize_the_project in the usual way].
{{{
% env CVSROOT="YOURCVSROOT" fw-init --name myproject --template Cxx --revision cvs
}}}
Changing directory into the project,
{{{
% cd myproject/
% cvs -n -q up
A .cvsignore
A AUTHORS
A ChangeLog
A Makefile.am.local
A NEWS
A README
A bootstrap
A configure.ac.local
A fw-pkgin/.cvsignore
A fw-pkgin/Makefile.am.local
A fw-pkgin/config
A fw-pkgin/post-install
A fw-pkgin/post-remove
A fw-pkgin/pre-install
A fw-pkgin/pre-remove
A fw-pkgin/start
A fw-pkgin/stop
A src/.cvsignore
A src/Makefile.am.local
A src/mylib.cc
A src/mylib.hh
A src/myprog.cc
A tests/.cvsignore
A tests/Makefile.am.local
A tests/testprog.cc
}}}

== Differences from fw-template-c ==

This template is almost identical to fw-template-c.  This is not necessarily
because C++ development is almost identical.  It's more due to the fact that
I haven't done alot of C++ since writing framewerk and so I haven't really
explored the possibilities.

Here are the differences:
  1. the automake macros for C++ compiler set up are called.
  1. AC_LANG is set to C++ .
  1. the automatically generated header is called PROJECTNAME.hh, and includes all .hh files in {{{src/}}}.
  1. the options for [FwTemplateCWalkthrough#Hardcore hardcore] compilation are slightly tweaked.

That's it!  So you should really read the [FwTemplateCWalkthrough fw-template-c walkthrough].

= Conclusion =

Congratulations!  You've made it through the fw-template-cxx walkthrough. 
Hopefully you found it helpful.

= Footnotes =
